(3.1_mainmenu_input_data)=
#Input data into NM

NeuroMiner works with 3D neuroimaging (i.e., NIFTI, SPM, or FreeSurfer)
and/or numerical data stored in matrices (e.g., Excel, csv, or MATLAB
formats). For example, these are some of the data you can enter:
- structural neuroimaging data (e.g., NIFTI files from an SPM study)
- functional neuroimaging data (e.g., NIFTI files from 2nd level
contrasts)
- FreeSurfer data (e.g., thickness or gyrification)
- clinical or cognitive data (e.g., in Excel)
- genetics or other biological data (e.g., in csv)
- functional connectivity matrices (e.g., in the MATLAB workspace)
- DTI streamline matrices (e.g., in the MATLAB workspace)

In NeuroMiner, each dataset is called a 'modality' and multiple
modalities can be entered at the same time to allow data fusion
(discussed below and in the section on [data fusion](3.2.001_data_fusion). For example, you can choose to
perform machine learning on structural neuroimaging data alone or in combination with cognitive data.

If data has not been entered and NeuroMiner does not detect a "NM"
structure in the MATLAB workspace, then the user will be given the
option to "1: load data for model discovery and cross-validation".
Selecting this option will transfer the user to the "NM data workspace
manager", which is an adaptive menu that changes based on selections,
such as the machine learning framework or the data input format.

If no data has been selected the NeuroMiner menu will display a default
menu that is configured for classification using NIFTI (neuroimaging) :\
1 : Define machine learning framework [ classification ]\
2 : Select data input format [ nifti ]\
3 : Define no. of samples and sample identifiers [ ??? ]\
4 : Involve unlabeled cases in the analyses [ no ]\
5 : Select space-defining image [ ??? ]\
6 : Read in additional image(s) for weighting [ no ]\
7 : Describe data [ ??? ]

The machine learning framework can be changed to regression, which will
modify some of the input entries that should be clear if the
classification framework is understood (e.g., changing the group labels
to a continuous measure). If you are in neuroimaging mode (i.e., if you
have established paths for SPM and/or FreeSurfer), selecting the second
option will change the menu to read:\
1 : SPM (basic models)\
2 : ANALYZE/NIFTI images (3D)\
3 : Cortical surface files (3D)\
4 : Matrix data (2D)

These options will now be outlined in order.

### SPM

NeuroMiner gives the option of simply entering in an SPM.mat structure
from a previous univariate analysis (e.g., t-tests, ANOVA, or
regression). Each of the options in the following menu need to be
selected:

1: Define machine learning framework \[ regression \]\
2: Select data input format \[ spm \]\
3: Select path to SPM.mat \[ ? \]\
4: Select space-defining image \[ ? \]\
5: Read in additional image(s) for weighting \[ No \]\
6: Describe data \[ ? \]

**Select path to SPM.mat** A pop-up dialogue box will appear where you
need to select the SPM.mat structure.

**Select space-defining image** Please see the description in the box
\"Space Defining Image\" regarding selection of brain regions using the
WFU PickAtlas.

**Read in additional image(s) for weighting** This option gives you the
opportunity to enter an image that will be used during preprocessing to
weight the brain image features. It is specifically designed for when
parcellated brain regions have been entered or when the WFU PickAtlas
has been used to select brain parcels. In these cases, the image will
consist of independent brain regions (e.g., the hippocampus, frontal
lobe, cingulate cortex etc.). You can therefore enter a map of the same
brain regions that have weights associated with each parcel based on the
degree of importance of each region; e.g., 1 for the hippocampus, 2 for
the frontal lobe, 3 for the cingulate. This weight map can then be used
during preprocessing to up- or down-weight the features in the analysis
(see section
[\[3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline\]](#3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline){reference-type="ref"
reference="3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline"}).

**Describe data** Enter a short description of this data for later
reference if there is more than one modality; e.g., \"cobre structural
imaging data\".

**IMPORT** Once the template is completed, you'll be given the option to
import the data into the NeuroMiner structure (i.e., the \"NM\"
structure) in the MATLAB workspace. The subject identifiers will be the
unique fields in the paths to the files (e.g., the subject directory or
filename).

### ANALYZE/NIFTI images

Analyze or nifti images can be selected here. Once this option is
selected, the menu will change to the following:

1 : Define machine learning framework \[ classification \]\
2 : Select data input format \[ nifti \]\
3 : Define no. of samples and sample identifiers \[ ??? \]\
4 : Involve unlabeled cases in the analyses \[ no \]\
5 : Select space-defining image \[ ? \]\
6 : Read in additional image(s) for weighting \[ No \]\
7 : Describe data \[ ? \]\
**Define no. of samples and sample identifiers** Enter the number of
groups (e.g., \"2\") and then enter descriptors for these groups (e.g.,
\"patients\" or \"controls\"). It's important to note that sensitivity
will be defined as the correct classification of individuals in the
first group entered, so this is usually patients in clinical studies.

**Involve unlabelled cases in the analysis** This gives the option to
use cases that do not have a label for semi-supervised learning.

**Select space-defining image** Please see the \"Space Defining Image
Box\".

**Read in additional image(s) for weighting** An image can be entered
here and it can be used in later processing steps to weight the entered
feature images.

**Map image files to samples** Use the SPM dialogue box pop-up to select
the images for the samples together or for the groups separately. We
recommend to print the absolute paths of the images in a text file and
then use the \"ed\" feature of the SPM dialogue box (bottom left) to
paste the paths. This can be one for the full group. You will then be
prompted to enter the groups one after the other.

**Define global multiplier** For each subject, multiply the voxel values
by a numeric value.

**Adjust data for globals** This option is primarily for structural
neuroimaging data where it is necessary to adjust the images for the
global brain volume (e.g., whole-brain volume or intra-cranial volume).
Either a vector is required in the MATLAB workspace or a text file is
required. It is **critical** to note that the values must be in the same
order as the images for your analysis--i.e., the participant order
**must** match because there is no subject matching procedure.

**Inspect image information and check registration** This option will
allow the user to check the registration parameters to the template
image and then display the images using the SPM check-reg function. This
is useful to check whether the images are going to be imported properly.

**Read in additional image(s) for weighting** This option gives you the
opportunity to enter an image that will be used during preprocessing to
weight the brain image features. For example, when parcellated brain
regions have been entered or when the WFU PickAtlas has been used to
select brain parcels the image will consist of independent brain regions
(e.g., the hippocampus, frontal lobe, cingulate cortex etc.). You can
therefore enter a map of the same brain regions that have weights
associated with each parcel based on the degree of importance of each
region; e.g., 1 for the hippocampus, 2 for the frontal lobe, 3 for the
cingulate. This weight map can then be used during preprocessing to up-
or down-weight the features in the analysis (see section
[\[3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline\]](#3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline){reference-type="ref"
reference="3.2.02.10_preprocessing_pipeline"} and 'Rank / Weight
Features'). Alternatively, reliability coefficient images that are
calculated during multi-site studies (e.g., with travelling subjects)
can be entered here.

**Describe data** Enter a short description of the data (e.g., \"cobre
mwrp1 images\"). This is important if there are more than one modality.

**IMPORT nifti** After successful completion of settings for Steps 1-7,
an option for 'IMPORT nifti' will appear. Selecting this option will
import the nifti images into the NM structure based on the
space-defining image that was selected and based on any correction for
global brain volume. The subject identifiers will be the unique fields
in the paths to the files (e.g., the subject directory or filename).

### Cortical surface files

This option is for FreeSurfer .mgz files. The menu items will change to
be the same as the above for NIFTI files.

Please note that once NeuroMiner has finished processing, there is no
utility currently to visualize the classifier results in the mgz format.

### Matrix data: MATLAB workspace

Matrix data is defined as any numeric data that is stored in a matrix
file, such as an Excel file, CSV file, .mat file, or in the MATLAB
workspace. The default menu is to enter variables from the MATLAB
workspace as outlined in this section, but other choices can be made by
selecting \"Define data provenance\". The following section will outline
the options specific to entry of data from the MATLAB workspace.

Define machine learning framework \[ classification \]\
Select data input format \[ matrix \]\
Define data provenance \[ MATLAB workspace \]\
Enter name of matrix variable containing the predictor data \[ ? \]\
Enter name of label variable in MATLAB workspace \[ ? \]\
Enter name of case ID variable in MATLAB workspace \[ ? \]\
Enter name of feature descriptor variable in MATLAB workspace \[ ? \]\
Describe data \[ ? \]\
**Enter name of matrix variable (cell array of string) in MATLAB
workspace** Enter the matrix containing the features (i.e., variables or
predictors) that you want to use to predict the labels (i.e., the target
or outcome variable). This variable must be a standard \[n x m\] MATLAB
double (subjects = n; features = m). That is, the subjects must be
entered row-wise and the features are column-wise.

**Enter name of label variable (cell array of strings) in MATLAB
workspace** Labels are the targets of the prediction. For
classification, these are group names or values (e.g., \"control\" and
\"patient\") and **must** be entered in a cell array of strings (see
Box: Data Types in NeuroMiner). We strongly discourage the use of
numbers to represent groups (e.g., \"1\" and \"2\") due to display and
visualisation later in processing.

**Enter the name of case ID variable (cell array of strings) in MATLAB
workspace** Enter a vector with the case IDs of each subject. This must
be a cell array of strings (see Box: Data Types in NeuroMiner).

**Enter name of feature descriptor variable (cell array of strings) in
MATLAB workspace** Enter a vector with the names of the features. This
must be a cell array of strings.

**Inspect matrix data and select features for import** Once the previous
settings are entered, this option appears which will open a results
display where the data can be viewed as a heatmap, scaled, and features
can be added or removed either by the user or they can be filtered based
on a threshold (see Fig. [1](#fig:matrix_inspector){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:matrix_inspector"}). For example, after scaling features,
you could establish a threshold where features with a scaled value above
0.8 are removed from the analysis. Alternatively, you might be concerned
about the number of NaN (\"Not a Number\") values being pruned or
imputed in later analysis and so you could filter out the features with
more than 25% missing values.

![You can inspect the data in the matrix inspector to understand the
data, identify errors, and exclude features or subjects. The descriptive
statistics that can be displayed by using the drop-down list at the top
right are the mean, median, variance, interquartile range, %(Nan) (i.e.,
\"Not a Number\" missing values), kurtosis, or skewness. The data can
also be scaled using the button underneath the drop-down list. Once a
descriptive option is selected, you can then enter a filter to exclude
either F(Feats) or F(Cases) based on a value. When a feature filter is
used, a red line will appear that signifies the filter value and
features above this value will be excluded and moved to the \"Feature
pool\" at the bottom left of the screen. You can manually add or
subtract features or subjects using the arrows $>$ between the feature
pool and the features to import. Once features have been understood,
filtered, or removed, press OK and return to the main
menu.](Images/Matrix_inspector){#fig:matrix_inspector
width="1.2\\linewidth"}

**Describe data** Enter a description of the data.

**IMPORT data** This option will import data to the NeuroMiner structure
(\"NM\") and progress to the next screen.

### Matrix data: from a .mat file

This is the same as entering data from the workspace, but you can just
select a pre-existing .mat file with all the variables. These are
displayed at the top of the screen and then you can enter them using the
directions above.

### Matrix data: from a text file

The data can be stored in a .dat, .txt, or .csv file that has been saved
with another program, such as Excel, R, or a database program. The file
**must** contain labels for each of the IDs, labels, and features in the
first row.

Define machine learning framework \[ classification \]\
Select data input format \[ matrix \]\
Define data provenance \[ Matrix from text file: \]\
Define delimiter in text file \[ tab \]\
Specify column header containing the label data \[ ? \]\
Define column header containing the case IDs \[ ? \]\
Inspect matrix data and select features for import\
Describe data \[ ? \]\
IMPORT

**Define delimiter in text file** Define the delimiter that was used to
generate the file (i.e., comma, tab, etc.). It is critical to use the
correct delimiter.

**Specify column header containing the label data** Write the column
header variable name for the label data in your CSV file; e.g.,
\"Illness\" or \"PANSS-General\". For classification, the variable
**must** be string variables instead of numerical coding (i.e., must be
'CTRL' and 'SCZ' instead of numbers representing these groups).

**Define column header containing the case IDs** Write name of the
column header variable name for the case IDs in your CSV file; e.g.,
\"ID\". These must be string variables (i.e., 'ID123' instead of 123).

**Inspect matrix data and select features for import** This feature
opens a results display where the data can be viewed as a heatmap,
scaled, and features can be added or removed either by the user or they
can be filtered based on a threshold (see Fig.
[1](#fig:matrix_inspector){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:matrix_inspector"}). For example, after scaling features,
you could establish a threshold where features with a scaled value above
0.8 are removed from the analysis or features that have more than 10%
NaN (\"Not a Number\") features are removed.

**Describe data** Enter a description of the data. This is important if
you are entering multiple modalities.

**IMPORT data** Import data into the NM structure.

### Matrix data: from a spreadsheet

This option will import data from a spreadsheet (only xls and xlsx). As
with CSV files, the file **must** contain labels for each of the IDs,
labels, and features in the first row.

Define machine learning framework \[ classification \]\
Select data input format \[ matrix \]\
Define data provenience \[ Matrix from spreadsheet file: \]\
Define name of sheet in spreadsheet file \[ Tabelle1 \]\
Specify column header containing the label data \[ ? \]\
Define column header containing the case IDs \[ ? \]\
Inspect matrix data and select features for import\
Describe data \[ ? \]\
IMPORT

**Define name of sheet in spreadsheet file** Choose the sheet that you
want to import.

**Specify column header containing the label data** Write the column
header variable name for the label data in your spreadsheet file; e.g.,
\"Illness\" or \"PANSS-General\". For classification, the variable
**must** be string variables instead of numerical coding (i.e., must be
'CTRL' and 'SCZ' instead of numbers representing these groups).

**Define column header containing the case IDs** Write name of the
column header variable name for the case IDs in your spreadsheet file;
e.g., \"ID\". These must be string variables (i.e., 'ID123' instead of
123).

**Inspect matrix data and select features for import** This feature
opens a results display where the data can be viewed as a heatmap,
scaled, and features can be added or removed either by the user or they
can be filtered based on a threshold (see Fig.
[1](#fig:matrix_inspector){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:matrix_inspector"}). For example, after scaling features,
you could establish a threshold where features with a scaled value above
0.8 are removed from the analysis.

**Describe data** Enter a description of the data. This is important if
you are entering multiple modalities.

**IMPORT data** Import data into the NM structure.

### Add a Modality, Add Covariates, and Finish Analysis {#3.1.02_add_modality}

Once data has been imported, you will be taken to the NM data workspace
manager. Above the menu, you'll see a section called \"MODALITIES\" that
will display the modality that has been entered and some descriptive
statistics (e.g., the dimensionality and the number of NaN ('Not a
Number') missing features). The menu will display the following:

1 : Add modality to NM workspace\
2 : Modify modality in NM workspace\
3 : Delete modality from NM workspace\
4 : Delete all data from NM workspace\
5 : Add covariate(s) to NM workspace\
6: Delete covariate(s) from NM workspace\
6 : Finish data import for discovery & cross-validation analysis

**1: Add modality to NM workspace** This option gives you the ability to
add another dataset to the workspace in order for later data fusion or
stacked generalization. It can be another modality (e.g., matrix data
and then neuroimaging data) or it can be the same modality (e.g.,
structural neuroimaging data of one type and then of another type). The
user will be then presented with the options that have been described
above to repeat the process of data entry for another modality. It is
critical to note that the subject identifiers have to be the same for
each modality. In the case of NIFTI or SPM import, NeuroMiner will
identify the subject IDs from the unique data in the file paths and thus
any other data needs to have the same subject IDs (e.g., matrix data).

**2: Modify modality in NM workspace** This option takes you back to the
\"Input data into NM screen\" where you can modify the settings or data
described above.

**3: Delete modality from NM workspace** Delete a modality that has been
entered.

**4: Delete all data from NM workspace** Delete all data and start
again.

**5: Add covariate(s) to NM workspace** This is a critical feature of
NeuroMiner that allows the entry of matrix data that can be used **in
later preprocessing steps** to control for nuisance covariance (e.g.,
age and sex). It is **critical** to note that this step **simply enters
the data and does not actually regress out the effects of the variables
from your data**. However, these data can be used to correct data for
nuisance covariates later in the preprocessing steps (see section
[\[3.2.02.2_preprocessing_pipeline\]](#3.2.02.2_preprocessing_pipeline){reference-type="ref"
reference="3.2.02.2_preprocessing_pipeline"}).

Please also note that if you want to normalise the data to a specific
group (see section
[\[3.2.02.6_preprocessing_pipeline\]](#3.2.02.6_preprocessing_pipeline){reference-type="ref"
reference="3.2.02.6_preprocessing_pipeline"}), a binary vector (i.e.,
zeros and ones) must be entered at this stage containing ones for the
individuals in the group that you want to normalise to.

The covariates must be stored in the MATLAB workspace--i.e., they must
be loaded prior to starting NeuroMiner. They also must be a standard
matrix double containing subjects in rows and covariates in columns. It
is critical to note that the subjects **must be in the same order as the
other data that has been entered**, regardless of what that data was.
This is especially important if you are using an automatic method of
selecting files for NIFTI images.

After the entry of the MATLAB matrix name, the variables can be defined
one-by-one or by using a vector. The covariate names will then be
displayed in the \"MODALITIES\" section at the top of the screen.

**Delete covariate(s) from NM workspace** Delete the covariates from the
workspace.

**Finish data import for discovery & cross-validation** This option will
finish the data import section. It is important to note that once this
is selected **you will no longer be able to modify any part of the
data**, including the addition of other modalities, covariates, or
anything else. If there are changes, then you will need to enter the
data again. Once the data has been processed, the user can however test
models by entering out-of-sample data (e.g., external data from another
center or group; see section
[\[mainmenu_3.9_input_data\]]{#mainmenu_3.9_input_data
label="mainmenu_3.9_input_data"}).
