(3.2.07_interpretation_options)=
# Prediction interpretation options

To increase clinical significance, individual explanations for predictions are essential. In this regard, NeuroMiner offers different methods to obtain interpretable and transparent models.

```{figure} Images/NM_paramtemp_mli.png
---
name: fig:NM_paramtemp_mli
alt: neurominer mli options
---
```

## Define occlusion method
Interpretability in NeuroMiner is based on occlusion methods where a fraction of features will be occluded and the change in prediction outcome will be quantified. Four different occlusion methods are  available:

```{figure} Images/NM_paramtemp_occlusion.png
---
name: fig:NM_paramtemp_occlusion
alt: neurominer occlusion options
---
```
A fraction of the features will be replaced by 1) extreme values (upper and lower percentile that can be chosen by the user); 2) the median of each feature’s training sample; 3) the feature value with the median quantile added or subtracted (depending on whether that individual’s feature is below or above the training sample median) ; or 4) a random value from each feature’s training sample.

## Define no. of iterations
Here the number of iterations can be defined, i.e. how often a fraction of features should be occluded. The default value is 1000 but one has to keep in mind that this might be limited by the number of possible combinations, especially if the number of input features is low.

## Define fraction of features to be visited per iteration
Here the user can define the fraction of features to be occluded each iteration.

## Use map from model visualization to operate in predetermined feature space
When the visualization module will be run, one can specify a map here, which will narrow down the feature space that will be evaluated by the interpretability module. The user can choose from different maps which will be created during visualization. If you enable this option, the menu will show two additional suboptions in the menu:

> 7 | Define which map to use                           [Cross-validation ratio map]
> 8 | Define cutoff value (scalar or 2-value vector)    [-2 2]

ADD REST

7 | Produce z-normalized prediction change estimates	[ None ]
